They remain under government custody, away from their parents, but these children from Cordova town have turned into achievers since being rescued from cyberpornography operations.
According to Cebu Vice Governor Agnes Magpale, vice chairperson of the Provincial Women and Children (PWC) Council, the first batch of rescued children has continued their studies. The eldest among them is now a second year college student taking up Hotel and Restaurant Management (HRM).
The HRM student is pursuing a college degree through a scholarship grant given by the University of Cebu President Augusto Go.
Magpale said another child, who is now in high school, is being nominated for a scholarship in Hong Kong.
A younger sibling of this second achiever is described as a "math wizard." The child is under a special education program of the Department of Social Welfare and Development in Central Visayas.
"They have become achievers, how very nice," Magpale said
These 3 children belonged to the first batch of those rescued in 2011. Their parents allegedly made them pose naked for Internet customers. The raid was a multi-agency operation led by the National Bureau of Investigation Region 7 and the Children's Legal Bureau.
The parents are now being tried before the Regional Trial Court Branch 27 in Lapu-Lapu City for trafficking and other cases.
Since then, the 7 rescued children have been away from their parents and placed under the care of the PWC Council in a safe house operated by the DSWD Region VII.
The PWC Council last week started the construction of a crisis center in one of the capitol's properties in Lahug, near the Provincial Police Office.
The construction of the PWC Crisis Center started on February 4. In a few months time, the facility will be able to receive children who are either in conflict with the law or rescued from trafficking and other criminal syndicates.
Women who are rescued from trafficking and other similar activities can also be accommodated in the facility, Magpale told Rappler in an interview.
Magpale testified as the prosecution's first witness back then.