Actress Angelica Panganiban is happily in a relationship with John Lloyd Cruz, whom she's been dating for almost 3 years. But in an interview with Vice Ganda on Gandang Gabi Vice Sunday, February 8, she shed more light on navigating this relationship, especially when it came to telling her best friend, John Prats.
John Prats used to date Shaina Magdayao, who went on to date John Lloyd Cruz, before John Lloyd got together with Angelica.
Angelica said that she and John Prats would "bash" Shaina and John Lloyd, in an effort to help him get over Shaina.

Angelica said that at the time, she initially didn't know how to tell her best friend that she was now dating John Lloyd.
“'Di ko talaga alam paano ko sasabihin sa kanya (John) kasi bina-bash kaya namin dati si Lloydie 'tsaka si Shaina,” Angelica said.
(I did not know how to tell him, because we actually used to bash Lloydie and Shaina.)
“Sinasabi ko talaga, ‘Ano ka ba, kaya mo 'yan, isipin mo hindi sila bagay, maghihiwalay din sila.’ (I really said 'You can do it! Just think that they are not meant for each other, and that they would break up.)
"Ako pala magiging dahilan! (I would become the reason)” Angelica laughed.
When Vice asked if Angelica felt she was the reason of the breakup, she said:" Feeling ko (I think so)."
She later joked: “Si Shaina, ano kaya nararamdaman, best friend ko, 'tapos jowa niya dati... Ako ang nagwagi.” (I wonder what Shaina feels, my best friend and then her ex-boyfriend before...I won!)
John Prats, who was also on GGV with Angelica, clarified that he felt awkward about the situation at the time, but relaxed later on, saying that he told John Lloyd to take care of Angelica.

Now it's really unclear if this is in reaction to Angelica's statements on GGV, but Shaina soon posted a quote from Thema Davis on Instagram.
She also posted these pointed comments in the caption:
"ONE thing I DO BEST to people who "try" to put me down and "try" to break me even if Im not doing anything to them? I PUT YOU ....ON MY PRAYER LIST exactly what I did before, and what I still will continue to do 3 years after #takethehigherroad #butplsdontmentionmynameeverrragain just a lil bumpy moment this evening based on friends texts but all good Still a good Sunday after all.. Blessed with #SundayWorkday w my #ASAP20 family and my ever loyal supporters #Shainatics Blessed with a wonderful loving family and a peaceful sunday evening surrounded with beautiful hearted friends Ah Life Still so much to be thankful for and to smile about Life is Good and our God is Great! THANK YOU, LORD for tonights comfortable sleep and sweetest dreams Good night, Instagram World," the caption read.
Do you think Shaina's comment was about Angelica?
Before John Lloyd, Angelica was in a 6-year relationship with actor Derek Ramsay. The two broke up in 2013. She's currently promoting her movie, romantic comedy That Thing Called Tadhana.