Like most Internet shops in the vicinity of UP Diliman, Alexine's Internet Cafe counts students among its regulars. But unlike most shops, Alexine's is markedly quiet.
On any given weeknight, the shop is bereft of gamers chiding each other over a cacophony of explosions, gunfires, and other sound effects. Instead, PhD students, teachers, and diligent kids flock to Alexine's to finish their projects, do online research, or even just to check Facebook. Older patrons would usually check their emails or chat with their families.
Installing games like DotA or HON is a lucrative move, especially with the onset of summer and school breaks being "slow months" for an Internet cafe business. But the shop's owner, Jenny Buriel, won't do it. Her customers can only count their lucky stars in finding a quiet computer shop in a bustling barangay like Krus na Ligas.
As an entrepreneur, Jenny knows the value of retaining a unique selling point. As a mother and friend, it's simply her nature to care and to keep her customers happy.
Shop owner, friend, and mother

Jenny is close to her customers. While waiting for their printouts or their change, they tell her stories about school, families, relationships, and even finances. "I get very concerned about them," she says. "I ask them why they stay so late, what they are working on… maybe that is what the customers like about me."
Being on familiar terms with customers has also helped establish Alexine's as a safe haven. Those who forget their wallets, cell phones, and USBs are assured that they can always come back for them the next day. Sometimes, customers don't have to pay extra for printing colored pages. "There are students who are short on budget; sometimes they pay so many fees for school or their allowances don't come on time… so they borrow from me. They do return (what they owe) right away," Jenny narrates.
The shop is named after Jenny's three-year old daughter, Alex. As a new mom, Jenny struggled with the long hours of her 9-5 job. Her daughter was also born with a heart condition that required frequent visits to the hospital. So when Alexine had to undergo an operation, Jenny chose to resign and focus on the business, in order to have more time for her daughter as well.
Thanks to Jenny's full-time dedication, the two Alexines are now doing well.

Beyond profit

These days, Jenny lives with her family in Mandaluyong. Her husband runs a canteen, and she also helps out her mom and sister with their own ventures. Nevertheless, Jenny prefers to manage the computer shop in Krus na Ligas. She still makes regular trips to oversee its operations and catch up with her customers.
She admits that it's hard to manage a business far from home. "We found it challenging, and we considered transferring [operations]," Jenny shares. "But our first concern were the students." There are still very few computer shops, especially those near schools, that offer the kind of service Jenny provides.
"I get happiness from giving back to our customers," Jenny says. "I make friends and I earn [their] trust… that's what I want. Profit is not so important, as long as we can help."